<h1 id="0">0 目录</h1>
* [7.2 获取当前时间](#7.2)

<h2 id="7.2">7.2 获取当前时间</h2>

Kernel code can always retrieve a representation of the current time by looking at the
value of jiffies. Usually, the fact that the value represents only the time since the
last boot is not relevant to the driver, because its life is limited to the system uptime.
As shown, drivers can use the current value of jiffies to calculate time intervals
across events (for example, to tell double-clicks from single-clicks in input device
drivers or calculate timeouts). In short, looking at jiffies is almost always sufficient
when you need to measure time intervals. If you need very precise measurements for
short time lapses, processor-specific registers come to the rescue (although they bring
in serious portability issues).

It’s quite unlikely that a driver will ever need to know the wall-clock time, expressed
in months, days, and hours; the information is usually needed only by user programs
such as cron and syslogd. Dealing with real-world time is usually best left to
user space, where the C library offers better support; besides, such code is often too
policy-related to belong in the kernel. There is a kernel function that turns a wallclock
time into a jiffies value, however:

    #include <linux/time.h>
    unsigned long mktime (unsigned int year, unsigned int mon,
                        unsigned int day, unsigned int hour,
                        unsigned int min, unsigned int sec);

To repeat: dealing directly with wall-clock time in a driver is often a sign that policy is being implemented and should therefore be questioned.

While you won’t have to deal with human-readable representations of the time, sometimes you need to deal with absolute timestamp even in kernel space. To this aim, `<linux/time.h>` exports the `do_gettimeofday` function. When called, it fills a `struct timeval` pointer—the same one used in the `gettimeofday` system call—with the familiar seconds and microseconds values. The prototype for `do_gettimeofday` is:

    #include <linux/time.h>
    void do_gettimeofday(struct timeval *tv);

The source states that `do_gettimeofday` has “near microsecond resolution,” because it
asks the timing hardware what fraction of the current jiffy has already elapsed. The
precision varies from one architecture to another, however, since it depends on the
actual hardware mechanisms in use. For example, some m68knommu processors,
Sun3 systems, and other m68k systems cannot offer more than jiffy resolution. Pentium
systems, on the other hand, offer very fast and precise subtick measures by
reading the timestamp counter described earlier in this chapter.

The current time is also available (though with jiffy granularity) from the xtime variable,
a `struct timespec` value. Direct use of this variable is discouraged because it is
difficult to atomically access both the fields. Therefore, the kernel offers the utility
function `current_kernel_time`:

    #include <linux/time.h>
    struct timespec current_kernel_time(void);

Code for retrieving the current time in the various ways it is available within the `jit`
(“just in time”) module in the source files provided on O’Reilly’s FTP site. `jit` creates
a file called `/proc/currentime`, which returns the following items in ASCII when read:

* The current `jiffies` and `jiffies_64` values as hex numbers
* The current time as returned by `do_gettimeofday`
* The `timespec` returned by `current_kernel_time`

We chose to use a dynamic /proc file to keep the boilerplate code to a minimum—it’s not worth creating a whole device just to return a little textual information.

The file returns text lines continuously as long as the module is loaded; each read
system call collects and returns one set of data, organized in two lines for better read ability.
Whenever you read multiple data sets in less than a timer tick, you’ll see the
difference between `do_gettimeofday`, which queries the hardware, and the other values
that are updated only when the timer ticks.

    phon% head -8 /proc/currentime
    0x00bdbc1f 0x0000000100bdbc1f   1062370899.630126
                                    1062370899.629161488
    0x00bdbc1f 0x0000000100bdbc1f   1062370899.630150
                                    1062370899.629161488
    0x00bdbc20 0x0000000100bdbc20   1062370899.630208
                                    1062370899.630161336
    0x00bdbc20 0x0000000100bdbc20   1062370899.630233
                                    1062370899.630161336

In the screenshot above, there are two interesting things to note. First, the `current_kernel_time` value, though expressed in nanoseconds, has only clock-tick granularity; do_gettimeofday consistently reports a later time but not later than the next timer tick. Second, the 64-bit jiffies counter has the least-significant bit of the upper 32-bit word set. This happens because the default value for INITIAL_JIFFIES, used at boot time to initialize the counter, forces a low-word overflow a few minutes after boot time to help detect problems related to that very overflow. This initial bias in the counter has no effect, because jiffies is unrelated to wall-clock time. In `/proc/uptime`, where the kernel extracts the uptime from the counter, the initial bias is removed before conversion.


