<h1 id="0">0 目录</h1>
* [7.3 延时执行](#7.3)
    - [7.3.1 长延时](#7.3.1)
    - [7.3.2 短延时](#7.3.2)

---

<h2 id="7.3">7.3 延时执行</h2>


<h3 id="7.3.1">7.3.1 长延时</h3>


<h3 id="7.3.2">7.3.2 短延时</h3>

When a device driver needs to deal with latencies in its hardware, the delays involved are usually a few dozen microseconds at most. In this case, relying on the clock tick is definitely not the way to go.

The kernel functions ndelay, udelay, and mdelay serve well for short delays, delaying
execution for the specified number of nanoseconds, microseconds, or milliseconds
respectively.* Their prototypes are:

    #include <linux/delay.h>
    void ndelay(unsigned long nsecs);
    void udelay(unsigned long usecs);
    void mdelay(unsigned long msecs);

The actual implementations of the functions are in <asm/delay.h>, being architecture-
specific, and sometimes build on an external function. Every architecture implements
udelay, but the other functions may or may not be defined; if they are not,
<linux/delay.h> offers a default version based on udelay. In all cases, the delay
achieved is at least the requested value but could be more; actually, no platform currently
achieves nanosecond precision, although several ones offer submicrosecond precision. Delaying more than the requested value is usually not a problem, as short
delays in a driver are usually needed to wait for the hardware, and the requirements
are to wait for at least a given time lapse.

The implementation of udelay (and possibly ndelay too) uses a software loop based on
the processor speed calculated at boot time, using the integer variable loops_per_jiffy.
If you want to look at the actual code, however, be aware that the x86 implementation
is quite a complexone because of the different timing sources it uses, based on what
CPU type is running the code.

To avoid integer overflows in loop calculations, udelay and ndelay impose an upper
bound in the value passed to them. If your module fails to load and displays an unresolved
symbol, `__bad_udelay`, it means you called `udelay` with too large an argument.
Note, however, that the compile-time check can be performed only on
constant values and that not all platforms implement it. As a general rule, if you are
trying to delay for thousands of nanoseconds, you should be using udelay rather than
ndelay; similarly, millisecond-scale delays should be done with mdelay and not one
of the finer-grained functions.

It’s important to remember that the three delay functions are busy-waiting; other
tasks can’t be run during the time lapse. Thus, they replicate, though on a different
scale, the behavior of jitbusy. Thus, these functions should only be used when there
is no practical alternative.

There is another way of achieving millisecond (and longer) delays that does not
involve busy waiting. The file <linux/delay.h> declares these functions:

    void msleep(unsigned int millisecs);
    unsigned long msleep_interruptible(unsigned int millisecs);
    void ssleep(unsigned int seconds)

The first two functions puts the calling process to sleep for the given number of
millisecs. A call to `msleep` is uninterruptible; you can be sure that the process sleeps
for at least the given number of milliseconds. If your driver is sitting on a wait queue
and you want a wakeup to break the sleep, use `msleep_interruptible`. The return value
from `msleep_interruptible` is normally 0; if, however, the process is awakened early,
the return value is the number of milliseconds remaining in the originally requested
sleep period. A call to ssleep puts the process into an uninterruptible sleep for the
given number of seconds.

In general, if you can tolerate longer delays than requested, you should use `schedule_timeout`, `msleep`, or `ssleep`.

